well there have been almost 1,200
diagnosed cases of Kovac 19 on the
Navajo Nation and over 40 deaths
now if Navajo Nation we crunch these
numbers were a state they would have the
third highest rate of transmission per
capita behind New York in New Jersey and
the peak hasn't even come there yet it's
not expected for a couple of weeks and
the culture that generates elders they
are terribly worried what will happen to
things
this is Shiprock peak the sacred heart
of Navajo Nation 27,000 square miles a
sight so beautiful it takes your breath
away but this morning we want you to
meet the real heart of Navajo Nation not
the postcard the people almost 200,000
of America's first citizens live here
and their hearts are filled with fear I
kind of get worried listen to Thomas is
71 she lives with her husband and
grandkids and like about 30% of the
people here they have no running water
the nearest pump miles and miles away
Eugene so is a tribal council
representative his home doesn't have
running water either he says his
community is becoming increasingly
desperate the casinos and coal mine now
closed how worried is he
[Music]
there's nothing coming
in this vast space almost 40% of the
homes have no electricity either they
are used to making do and that's lucky
because promise federal aid has only
just begun to trickle in after five
weeks of pleading for help
Navajo Nation president Jonathan Nez
sometimes we feel that we tribal people
tribal nations are at the bottom of the
list when it comes to limited resources
just a few days ago you told us you
hadn't received a penny
well we're hopeful that this week will
be a better week for us we're not gonna
roll over or we're not gonna feel sorry
for ourselves you know it just seems
alarming that the first citizens of this
country are kind of pushed to the
backburner there are people helping the
Arizona National Guard flew in supplies
a team from Johns Hopkins center for
American Indian Health has been on the
ground for more than 30 years Hopkins
staff are now building hand-washing
stations those hand-washing stations are
costing us about $30 a piece to
construct they could be life-saving
these settings at this time Hopkins is
also delivering aid Jami Begay
distributing supplies this box - Helen
George a traditional Weaver who is
diabetic and lives alone 20 miles out of
town I wash my hands every every hour it
seems like you know she told us that she
didn't have a vehicle had we not gone
out there you know who in would have
been the next time that she would be
able to get this kind of supplies that
we were able to provide as for the local
hospitals there is a desperate need for
staff says dr. Diana who she's worked
here for 35 years biggest part of our
team that's a problem is that we have a
30% vacancy rate for our nursing staff
and that was before the virus got the
first wave of patients so we kind of got
the first tsunami which overwhelmed a
lot of our capability the message from
all those we spoke to help is needed and
fast our federal government has broken
promise after promise after promise and
what we're seeing today is the
accumulation of those broken promises
and where it has left people it has
happened so many times but so the
federal government has approved 10
billion dollars to help all 574 American
Indian tribes in this country but the
money hasn't really been distributed yet
tribes had to apply for grants they had
to have those applications in last
Friday now it's up to the federal
government to decide who's going to get
what if you are motivated to help guys
you can go to our website NBC News com
back to you Cynthia I just you know I
don't speak for a lot of folks here I I
had no idea first of all they 40% of
those homes in the Navajo Nation 40%
don't have electricity 30% with no
running water yeah how'd you wash your
hands when you don't have running water
yeah Cynthia McFadden for us on this
Monday morning Cynthia thank you
you